Then let the army do it. You cannot run the
battlefield from the White House. I don't care
who's president. It's the big fancy word today is
micromanagement. We didn't know what it was then,
but they were doing it.
That's not how you get there from here. Give your
units an assignment for which they're trained to
do.
In wartime, things happen wrong and examples You
may get 50 Arabic linguists sent to a war in Vietnam
because they finished language school and
everybody's going to Vietnam. Why, you learned
Arabic and I learned Vietnamese, but sir, it took
me two years to learn that one. Learn this one, you
got a year while you're here. Start
interrogations at 2 o'clock a day. Hi, I'm down
here. You got any Arabs for me to interrogate?
These accidents happen. The sheer numbers. You
try to get between the perfect and the imperfect.
There's some compromise out there. Hopefully the
ideal prevails a little bit. Sometimes it
doesn't. On that train of thought,
I've heard or it's been said that Vietnam, the war
was managed rather than... Oh, yeah. It was war by
management. And that's where the body counts, the
ratio of management. I can scale it. and measure
you. Wars are won or lost on leadership. That's the
difference between the American units, even
though the advisory program was management. You
were in the woods if the decision was wrong. You
were out there with their unit you were peddling
your good expert advice to. They may not just take
it. No, sir, we don't want any of that today. Then
you had to see if you were smart enough to get the
same advice, figure out another way to get there.
It hangs on leaders. It falls on leaders. All wars
do. Never seen a manager win one yet. So what do you
think about the bombing, the effect that the
American firepower had, in particular on the way
that the South Vietnamese viewed the U.S. troops
in the United States? How did it affect you,
especially since you were working with MACV?
Well, where we were, where I was in MACV, we did not
have, in III Corps, in Saigon, Benoit, Jardin,
which was the west of, we were in Benoit. We did not
have this mass firepower of American units. We
were in the pacified region. There was no effect on
us. uh you didn't see b-52 sorters you could see the
planes go over uh one of the things is the
vietnamese i think by us making them miniature
copies relied on our technology artificially
introduced into their system when we left we took
our goodies with us you know if there was a problem
in vietnam it wasn't the problem of how to fight
even though there was a problem there It wasn't a
problem of should we fight. I think if anybody sees
an attack going on that we perceived, and I hope we
were right, you get in. The problem was the way we
left. If we're going to turn the war over to win for
yourselves because we can't stand the pain any
longer because too many of us are dying of being
crippled. Good luck, suckers. And now the good
news. We're leaving. The bad news is we're taking
our toys with us. The Toys R Us store was closed.
Weapons R Us quit being Weapons R Us. We didn't
supply the B-52s for them. We couldn't supply that
quality that was missing in the Army leadership.
It was missing in ours at the same time, possibly.
I think the outcome based on what we did to the Army
was a foregone conclusion. It was... Senator
Aiken from Vermont said, if you're going to leave,
just leave. Declare yourself a winner and come
home. We did. Peace with honor.
Was there anything in particular that stands out
in your mind as far as... I know we talked about
morale a little bit, but... especially when you
were working as an advisor, that had a very
positive effect on the RFPF forces that you were
utilizing? Well, I think the biggest effect we had
in that area was we retrained the NCO and others at
the local level, at the district level. sent some
RF units through our own in-house training,
scrounged up the extra ammo, the guns, the
uniforms, ran them through what would amount to
our boot camp. Never mind the bull that goes with
boot camp. Run them through. Everybody's already
got a rifle. Now they're all the same. We want to
show you what M16s can do. Run them through it and
see the morale difference in the unit. Now they can
get ammunition. They've got all the weapons of the
same. They've got the best. We're carrying them,
but they're carrying them. They got rid of the
bolt-action rifle, the nine kinds of ammo,
everybody looking like a rag muffin. They looked
like an army. I think that was probably the biggest
success a sergeant working down there with me ever
did. Run them through it. We'd go out there, we'd
run them through it. He runs them through it. I'm
the officer. I stand there with their officer and
watch. He runs them. It's then going back in the
village with them. and seeing these units fight
communists on a local level, act like an army.
Instead of acting like 20-year-old kids,
20-year-old men, 10-year-old dogs crippled up,
old age, over the hill, they gained this
togetherness. Their equipment they knew was
going to work. We scroungers used magazines, and
how we got them, you know, scrounging was a way of
life. When you were through training them, they
looked good. They acted better. They were an army.
They weren't a collection.
And I would think if I had one thing I'd point a
finger at and say, yes, there's something about an
RFPF unit I can stick my fingers on, they looked
like a military unit instead of a bunch of people
out for weekend drill.
Uh, seriously, I kind of lost my train of thought.
the
uh do you think that i know i noticed you mentioned a
while ago that you felt like that at the hamlet
level the rfp forces they were the key to our
success or they would have should have been or
could have been they were where we went in live with
them work with them necessarily died with them
they were the keys because the village the hamlet
in vietnam was that's the center of their universe
not this abstraction called national government
in saigon that's the french-american creation
there was only one person known to everybody in
vietnam was ho chi minh bao dai was well known also
southerner Once you got past that, it was the
Vietnamese generals who were favored by the
Americans, and if we didn't like you one day, we
killed you off or replaced you in the next coup.
It's at the village, the Vietnamese, the graves,
the ancestors are there. Life evolved about spot
X, Y, the village, the hamlet. That's where you won
the hearts and minds, if that's what we're going to
talk about, winning in the war. You convinced them
to quit straddling the fence, and 80% of them sat on
the metal and watched. Let's get them off the
fence. Whoever gets them off the fence wins the
war. It didn't matter what happened in the jungle,
what happened in the towns with the guns, the big
army fights. It's out there. I'm winning them five
at a time, ten at a time, or I'm losing them. I saw a
quote
on a film. I don't remember the name of it.
Westmoreland made the statement
that the value of life to Asians was not, they
didn't place as great a value on life as Westerners
do. What do you think about that statement? Well,
first, I think something you need to look at in a
question like that, part of it's going to be a
religious answer. If you're a Buddhist, You're
coming back again and again and again until you
obtain perfection. Life's not one trip through.
The next thing is, if you're a communist commander
and all you have is people to throw at our
high-firepower technology, you throw a mass of
people at it. There was a difference in value
there. Not to say that we would not expend you for a
target. We did. It's just that we don't hang signs
on it and say, hey, dear Ms. Smith, we just spent
Johnny and 24 of the men in an aerial recon scout
platoon so we could find 1,000 communists and kill
them. We sent the scouts out, and your job in life
was radio back and say, boss, we found them. Give me
your grid, quick. That was your job in the war. Did
that happen? Sure it happens. You mean when you
breathe? There's no rescue. You last 30 seconds.
The unit's still in the area. We're not going to get
out there with a thousand men to rescue you. We sent
you probing. Johnny, it's take the stick and go
poke in the woods and find me something. When you
find it, phone me. Now, it's the intel types that
try to guess what did you find. Sir, I think they
found the big one. We better get out there. And
everybody piled on. We were air mobile. We could
fly you from Bryan to here anywhere 10 miles, 20
miles, 30 miles, 40 miles rapidly. But not rapidly
enough to save that unit. It just went out there.
But that's okay. Look how we cover it. The platoon
was annihilated. That was the usual case. Or badly
shot at, militarily unaffected. But when you did
the company back, it lost one out of four platoons.
It's ineffective. The battalion lost one platoon
out of 19, 20, however many was in a battalion. The
brigade lost one platoon out of its 50 platoons or
200. The brigade didn't even miss them. And that
night on the 5 o'clock briefing, you were a
pinpoint. Yes, sir, we made contact with the enemy
this morning. It commenced at 0900, whatever time
it started. And we're piling on, sir. The initial
report was we lost 20 men killed. We've now killed
several hundred of them. The fight continues. It
may take four, five, six days to play it out.
Somewhere along the way, the enemy starts to
withdraw because you replied your superior
firepower. They're breaking off contact.
They're sneaking away. A little carriage won't
stand up and fight. In about a week, it's all over
with big battles. And when you threw, nobody knows
who that platoon was that disappeared. They just
gone. Did they, when after the platoon made
contact, did they call in the artillery
immediately? No, they didn't always have it. They
were sometimes in range, sometimes out of range,
just depending where we sent you. We want you to go
look for it, boys. What patrols do is go out there in
those spots that aren't covered and look around.
What did you find? We think there's 800 of them out
there. Go find them. Now, you stir them up good, you
hear. Tippy,
tippy, tippy, tippy, tippy, and then whack, you
show up. They had figured out pretty quickly all
the places you could land helicopters in. They had
people watching them. They watched them. You
tried to sneak in. Sometimes you snuck in,
sometimes you didn't. They didn't want to shoot
you. The asshole laid flat and let you walk by them.
They want you dead, you're dead. But we traded
those people to get the big numbers.
I wouldn't think in some ways they were any worse
callous or more callous than us. I think there's a
technology difference. They had to employ more
people. I don't think any commander loves to throw
away men.
You know, I don't think, and I think that's one of
the things that I think we had a bad picture. If you
understood that you had five tries to do life or ten
tries, you could play them differently. You could
learn something every time you come through.
If that's what they believe, then they can afford
to be different. Regardless of what's true, it's
perception that counts. And the problem we had is
we had to write letters home to Mayor Smith. Dear
Mayor Smith, Johnny's not going to come back.
Johnny's on his way home early.
From what I saw on the TV when I would come back in
Ashford looking at it, we ran the war scores on TV
like a football game. Them on one corner of the
screen and us on the other. I'm not sure what that
said back here either, except the numbers got
bigger every year. You know, when you're over
there, you don't know how many men died. You knew
how many men died in your local area, how many men
was wounded. You didn't have the war toes. It
wasn't your job to worry about it. Then you come
home and you find out, well, gosh, is this how it
went? Yeah, home. And it's, so what?
What do you, how do you think that? Or do you think
the anti-war movement back in the States had an
effect on the troops in Vietnam? When you were
there, did you realize it was going on? You would
hear in 67 and 68, yeah, we heard. How much an effect
it had, I'm not sure. Some of the guys held up
pictures of the protesters back home, you know,
and poked holes through them so you can, you know,
Some came over less willing to die in a place that
didn't look like it was going to win. I think the
demonstrations back home, from looking backward
at it, was a turning point signal that the other
side looked at and said, if the American public
doesn't support the war, we've won.
It's hard to say which happens first. Was the
public here against the war when the numbers got
too big, the expense got too high? and we'd have
left anyway, or was that extra shove what
happened? I don't know. You know, still don't. It
happened. It did have an effect. In the advisory
program, I don't think we paid much mind to it. You
know, you weren't into worrying about it. Do you
think that the National Guard should have been
called up? That decision, when Lyndon Johnson,
having made the decision not to call the Guard,
that settled it. If there's a turning point in the
war, militarily, in thinking, it's the decision
not to disrupt the national economy by calling the
Guard. I personally believe if you have them, you
should be able to use them. You should also keep
them trained for that use. They weren't. The Guard
wasn't trained in that era. It was the place to go if
you didn't want to go. The way to save your butt was
join the Guard.
If there's ever a thought about that, and I'm going
to put it in even though it's not in this era, did
Quail avoid going? He damn sure did. And I think one
of the cartoons on the wall was, had the wall
saying, Dan Quail, where were you? He was home
saving his butt. If he's a hawk, hawks go. And I
guess I class myself as a hawk, I went. If you're a
hawk, you eat chickens. And
leave it at that. That's an out of context thing. I
had made my decisions. I would. I can't climb in
anybody else and answer for them. They have to
answer for themselves. How did you feel about the
draft doctors? Did that have any effect on you
after you came back? I recognize you have a right in
our system not to go. I also recognize you may
choose to break a law and not go and go to jail and pay
your price. They didn't pay.
Personally, I don't like them, but I have to live
with them, and they have to live with me. So it's
that conflict in American politics that's never
going to be resolved. The ones that want to go are
going to go.
And think what they think about the ones that went,
and then, you know, as it turns out, the ones that
didn't go said, say we didn't win, so what were you
and all your friends dying for? And it's the
unanswerable question. I did not like what they
did. They have a right to do that. You know, I'll
defend their right to say no. I don't have to like
you for saying no. That's right. That's
interesting. And... This is like the thing, and I
had a medic that was a conscientious objector, one
of the best guys I ever knew in my life. Wouldn't
carry a gun. He served.
I didn't like him because he was a CO, and I make no
whine about it, but he was a good man, one of the best
I ever had. He did his job. Everybody warned me he
was different. Being different Didn't kill him,
didn't mark him, but I'm saying, you know, looking
at it, why don't you carry a gun? I don't believe in
it. Why are you here? I didn't believe in running.
And you have to admire him. I admire him much more
than I admire the ones either hid in the Garden of
States or tiptoed to Canada or Mexico or anywhere,
or just hid. You know, I guess I fired it with my last
name, and irony that Stallone becomes famous with
that name. And at least I've been told that he was in
a girls' school, a dance school in Switzerland.
Oh, really? But, uh, but see, perception becomes
reality.
And, uh,
you know, it's one of those strange quirks. Well,
did you, do you think, uh, I think
selective service had to enforce a set of rules
that had too many loopholes. If asked, do you favor
a draft, my answer is yes, but universal military
conscription. At age 18, everybody goes. If you
don't want to carry a rifle, I've got plenty of
bedpans. Plenty of national hospitals. That way
you don't have to wear a uniform and do one thing to
help a war effort. I am probably opposed to a
volunteer army because I believe they are
mercenaries, pure and simple, out for a paycheck.
And I prefer one of draftees. Even with the problem
of education of the draftee, I believe that's the
only way you put your people as a group in touch with
this side of democracy which says some of us may
have to go die in order for the rest of us to have what
we consider the good life. I don't think we should
have it on just volunteers. Of course, I recognize
the law really says in Congress, if there's a war,
we'll draft. I think we should use a draft all the
time. It leaves you with a large professional
manpower pool if you need it. We're out of that
manpower pool. The guys from Vietnam are aged 35 to
40, 45, 50.
It's been nearly 20 years since the last large
units left. If you have to call up reserves, all
you've got left now are the reservists, the guard
units, the regular Army, and I'm going to call them
the over 40 Vietnam guys. You need a different
force, I believe, than that to help. And I think a
draft is a way to keep new people entering the
manpower pool in large numbers. Do you think that
the... because of the the deformance and
everything that there was a any particular
segment of society that was well sure whittled
down i think whether it's fair or unfair that is a
matter of fact more blacks and browns and poor
whites if you want to call them a disadvantage
whatever good name you want to stick on poor or
others died. You know, one of the problems with
saying, well, it was just purely accidental, was
we gave deferments. If you had money to stay in
college, you had the IQ. But if you'd graduated in
that era and didn't want to go to college, you were
battlefield meat. If you were poor, regardless of
race, you became an infantryman, a mortarman, a
rifleman, the grunt. If you had the education, you
became an intelligence, became an officer,
became an NCO, something. Also, it should be said
at the same time, the people wanting out of the
barrio, the ghetto, and off the street, they also
volunteered to go to those elite units that drew
extra pay because they wanted the money. It was a
ticket out. A lot of those tickets got punched. It
was an out with a dead end. Others got out. And I
personally think they paid disproportionately.
And that's why I would go back to the original
answer, a universal. No holes, no exceptions.
Then we don't have to worry about, why didn't you?
Won't be anybody. It'll just be you and them or
whatever. When you came back to the States, did you
have any particular feeling that stood out in your
mind when you
were confronted by the sentiment here? Yeah, I
would think, you know, you... come back to the West
Coast, go through the airports, find out the guys
wearing the uniforms, the bad guys, the good guys
were in the street with sticks, weren't the police
either.
It was, and I guess the biggest resentment part
was, it was the country kind of in a way said, God, we
sent you, but we sure hate to acknowledge you were
there. And I think that was the, that's more
damning and more aggravating than whether some
people in the street didn't like what you did. You
can live with them. It's the official side of it,
the non-recognition side. Did you feel betrayed
by the government? I'm not sure I ever analyzed it
up to that point. You didn't have your homecoming
parade, but it wasn't World War II either.
I think the longer it went, the longer you look
back, the more it may have worked toward that. I
don't like that word. I'm not sure that's the one
I'd pick. I'm not sure what I'd put in there. Anger
at the government probably didn't do more to solve
its own problem of it was going to go win or go stay
home. I think long term, you look at the loss of the
guys you worked with, and you're always going to
have that question. If it was a good cause, and we
went. They died and paid for a good cause. If it was a
bad cause, why did we go? And I don't think anybody
who went necessarily, and those in that area who
didn't go, are going to be able to judge out with a
good, clean answer on either side was it a good or
bad cause. I think it started out with some very
noble ideals.
I think it evolved into something else. and I'm not
sure what I would do with it other than saying, I
think, to go back that line, if we're going to go,
then let's go win, because I think at the time I was
in Vietnam, even in the advisory program, I viewed
the war as winnable if. Get up and do something. Do
you have any experiences on your return that stand
out? Anything where you treated? Oh, I think
everybody had a spot where you hit where were you,
you know, and somebody said, oh, you were,
quote-unquote the baby killer, I think a lot of
guys bumped into at least one of those. I'm not sure
it's any worse than the draft dodger who went to
Canada coming back, and he was one of them. I think
every war has a high side and a low side. You know,
the parade down Main Street is one side of it. And
what do you say about your war? You know, at least
the first clear loss we suffered in quite a while.
You know, everybody used to remark, and I guess
particularly the early days in ROTC in the early
60s, wonder what the German Army felt like that
lost in World War II. Now you know. No. You got your
answer in the 70s. It didn't kill the Army. We went
through an evolution of leadership. I'm not sure
of management back into leadership now. I'm still
not sure we've evolved out what picture we want the
Americans to have. When you borrow women from
combat, but let them take the jump slots and fly the
planes in peacetime that the men will have to do in
flying wartime. I find that totally ironic. I say
if I can't use them, I don't want them wearing the
jump wings. I don't want them standing in the door
of my plane. If they can wear the wings and fly the
planes and pull the trigger, then I want the law
changed that says we're going to put them on the
front line and treat them just like any other
soldier. You know, I think part of ours is to
question ourselves of what we want society to be
like. Do you really want your women out there with
you cutting throats? See, we have these myths we
have in our society. The Tarzan and Jane, whatever
you want to make it out to be. Now we find out Jane's
maybe a better killer than you are.
Do you think that it was a... that our failure in
Vietnam was a product of those myths? Do you think
that our culture didn't allow us to win, or... Or
the myths that we went over there with caused us to
not be able to? Or the myths even got us there in the
first place? Well, I think the question we said in
World War II was the strategic region of the
country, of the world. If it was, then it still is.
You're always conditioned by your perception of
the world. What is it? We were conditioned. We got
there. We had a set of beliefs that didn't fit
reality. We didn't adjust them. In a way, Vietnam
was to us what the end of the British Empire was to
them, the ending of World War II. The Empire slips
away.
We did ours a little differently. I think we didn't
want territory as such, merely want control of the
region. I think you need to decide when you go
what's it worth how much will i will i pay how much am
i willing to pay where do i draw the line if the line
is to leave short of accomplishment of it then you
should ask yourself should i go at all and i think
that takes a look at reality that we still may not
want to face and i think there's been a number of
books written on the limits of american power it
should be marked with american lives I think you
spend too many Americans in a war that isn't fought
quickly, and I tell everybody, we like our wars
like football games, four quick quarters and
sudden overtime, if necessary. But don't make it a
forever affair. You know, Vietnam, a 10,000-day
war, the forever war. The first policy war we
fought, our policy is contained communism. We've
had it from Truman to Eisenhower, all of them. In
Vietnam, we got ourselves caught in the swamp. We
got bogged down and won. Could we have won if we'd
applied enough men or enough technology at the
right time? Sure. Did we have the resolve to win?
No. I think the resolve went to the crew that won. Do
you think that... the myths that led us there in the
first place were valid? Or could we have even known
if they weren't?